# Software installation

`$ pip install activeatlas`

This will download the scripts and the package containing the reference anatomical model and the trained texture classifiers.

Edit `global_setting.py`. In particular, specify the following variables:
- `DATA_DIR`
- `REPO_DIR`

# File organization #

Every image generated by the pipeline can be uniquely identified by the following information:
- image name: See below.
- version: a word that specifies a channel or the processed result of a particular channel. For example, it can be "Ntb" for neurotrace channel, "CHAT" for the ChAT channel, "NtbNormalized" for the intensity-normalized neurotrace channel.
- resolution: a word that specifies the pixel resolution. It can be "raw", "down32" (downsample raw data in both dimensions by a factor of 32), "thumbnail" (same as "down32"). It can also be an absolute physical size such as "10.0um".
- prep id: a number or word that identifies the preprocessing procedure applied, such as rotation and cropping.

### Image Name ###

Each physical section is associated with an `imageName`.
There is no fixed composition rule for image names.
The principle is that one can trace back from an image name to the physical section. Therefore in each image name, these two elements are mandatory:
- slide number
- section or scene index in the slide

Other than that, the brain id is optional but desired. Other information such as the scan date or stain name are optional.
For example, both `CHATM3_slide31_2018_02_17-S2` and `Slide31-Nissl-S2` are valid image names.
It is important to use only one composition rule for each brain. Do not use space or special characters.

# Preprocessing a new stack

In this part, the user examines the images, creates tissue masks, aligns the sections in a stack and (optionally) crops the images.

## Data preparation

The raw images must be of sagittal sections, with the anterior at the left and the posterior at the right.

All images must be 16- or 8-bit tiff. To convert Zeiss scanner output from czi format to 16-bit tiff, use `CZItoTIFFConverter` ([download link](http://cifweb.unil.ch/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=152&Itemid=2), [user manual](https://www.unige.ch/medecine/bioimaging/files/7814/3714/1634/CZItoTIFFConverter.pdf)).

## Initialization

Create a JSON file that describes the image file paths. The file contains the following information:
- `raw_data_dirs`: this is a dict with a list of (version, resolution)-tuples as keys. For example they keys might be ('CHAT', 'raw') or ('Ntb', 'thumbnail').
- `input_image_filename_mapping`.
- `input_image_filename_to_imagename_re_pattern_mapping`

The image file path mappings are indexed by (version, resolution) tuples.

An example file is `CHATM3_input_specification.json`.

Run `$ initialize.py <input_spec_filepath>`.

Make sure the following items are generated under `DATA_DIR/<stack>`:
- `<stack>_sorted_filenames.txt`. In this file, each line contains an image name (without space), followed by its index in the series. The index is used to determine the z-position of a section, so any unused section still occupies an index slot. For these sections, use the word "Placeholder" in place of image name.
- `<stack>_thumbnail_Ntb`. This contains images named `<imageName>_thumbnail_Ntb.tif`. These can be either symbolic links or actual files.
- `<stack>_raw_Ntb`. This contains images named `<imageName>_raw_Ntb.tif`. These can be either symbolic links or actual files.
- `<stack>_raw_CHAT`. This contains images named `<imageName>_raw_CHAT.tif`. These can be either symbolic links or actual files.

## Intensity normalize fluorescent images

`$ normalize_intensity.py <stack> [input_version] [output_version]`

`<input_version>` default to "Ntb".
`<output_version>` default to "NtbNormalized"

Make sure the following items are generated under `DATA_DIR/<stack>`:
- `<stack>_thumbnail_NtbNormalized`

## Compute intra-stack transforms

`$ align.py <stack>`

This script computes a rigid transform between every pair of adjacent sections using the third-party program `elastix`.
It then selects an anchor section (by default this is the largest section in the stack) and concatenate the adjacent transforms to align every section to match the anchor.

On the workstation, with 8 processes, this takes about 30 minutes.

Make sure the following items are generated under `DATA_DIR/<stack>`:
- `<stack>_elastix_output`
- `<stack>_prep1_thumbnail_NtbNormalized`
- `<stack>_anchor.txt`

## Review alignment

`$ gui/preprocess_tool_v3.py <stack>`

- Click "Load image order"
- Adjust the order by moving particular images up or down the stack.
- Click "Save image order"
- If the alignment between any pair requires correction,
	- Click "Edit transforms"
	- Browse to the pair whose alignment needs correction.
	- Compute new alignment either by re-running `elastix` using another parameter file or manually providing matching landmark points.

If any correction is made, make sure the following items are generated under `DATA_DIR/<stack>`:
- `<stack>_custom_transforms`

Then re-run
`$ align.py <stack>`

## Specify cropping

Cropping of the images is desired to focus computation only on the region of interest.

Select "Show cropbox". Draw a 2-D crop box.
Also set the first section and the last section.

Make sure the following items are generated under `DATA_DIR/<stack>`:
- `<stack>_alignedTo_<anchorImageName>_cropbox.txt`. This file contains one line (xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax, sec_min, sec_max).

Run
`$ crop.py <stack>`

This invokes ImageMagick `convert` to crop the thumbnail images and transform and crop the raw images. Note that because the transform and crop of the raw images is done in one command, we do not store the aligned but non-cropped raw images.

Make sure the following items are generated under `DATA_DIR/<stack>`:
- `<stack>_prep2_thumbnail_<channel>`
- `<stack>_prep2_raw_<channel>`

## Generate masks

`$ mask_editing_tool_v3.py <stack>`

1. Upon starting, the GUI shows the aligned uncropped thumbnail image stack. The program uses snake to evolve contours and requires an initial contour that completely encircles the tissue to be provided for every section. The contours should be as tight as possible because the time for contour evolution will be minimized.
You are only required to draw such initial contours on 5-10 sections where the extent of the tissue changes abruptly. On such a section, click "Create initial contour", and then place vertices consecutively to create a contour.
2. Once done drawing initial contours on all selected sections, click "Interpolate". The contours for the remaining sections are automatically generated by interpolation.
3. Click "Shrink". The program evolves the initial contour on every section towards the tissue (using python package `morphsnake`). For many sections, this procedure produces multiple disjoint submasks. Once finished, the GUI shows on top of the thumbnail images the contour for each submask. All submasks are stored in `<stack>_submasks`. It is often hard for the program to judge whether a submask is normal tissue or dirt/debris. Therefore, before exporting the final mask, we add a human verification step in which a human verifies the validity of each submask.
4. Click on each submask contour to toggle whether the submask is valid or not. If the auto-generated submasks are not accurate, you can also create new submasks by drawing on the images. Submasks of all sections that are modified are stored in `<stack>_submasks_modified`. Once done, click "Save masks". The final masks as binary images are generated in `<stack>_prep1_thumbnail_mask`.
5. Click "Crop" button to generate cropped versions of the masks. They are stored in `<stack>_prep2_thumbnail_mask`.


# Processing a new stack given a trained atlas

`learning/pipeline_aws.ipynb`

Step 1: Convert image to scoremap.

`$ ./images_to_scoremaps.py <stack>`

Step 2: Reconstruct score volume and compute spatial gradient.

`$ ./reconstruct_score_volume.py <stack>`

Step 3: Register to atlas.

`$ ./register.py <transform_spec>`

## Visualize and revise annotations using the labeling GUI

Download warped atlas maps into `VOLUME_DIR/<atlasName>/<atlasName>_<warp>_<fixedMapName>`.

Click "Load warped structures". Select structure. The structure contour (p=0.5) will be displayed over the images. You can move or rotate with respect to structure center. Each structure is manipulated as one integral 3-D entity. For complete instructions on how to interact with GUI, see [User Interface README](../gui/README.md).

Click "Save prob. structures". All structures currently loaded are saved into the file `ANNOTATION_DIR/<stack>/<stack>_annotation_probStructures_<timestamp>.hdf`.

Each row of the structure annotation file is indexed by a random `structure_id`. The columns are

* `volume_in_bbox`: bloscpack-encoded string of 3-D volume, isotropic voxel size ~ 0.45 micron * 32 = 14.4 micron.
* `bbox`: (xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax,zmin,zmax), wrt "wholebrain", same voxel size as above.
* `name`: structure name, unsided
* `side`: L or R or S
* `edits`. list. Each entry is a dict.
	* `username`
	* `timestamp`
	* `type`: shift3d or rotate3d
	* `transform`: flattened 3x4 matrix
	* `centroid_m`
	* `centroid_f`


# Training the atlas:

## Create annotations using the labeling GUI

If you want to edit previously saved contours, click "Load contours".

Create or edit contours. For complete instructions on how to interact with GUI, see [User Interface README](../gui/README.md).

Click "Save contours". All contours currently loaded are saved into the file `ANNOTATION_DIR/<stack>/<stack>_annotation_contours_<timestamp>.hdf`.

Each row of the contour annotation file is indexed by a random `contour_id`. The columns are

* `class`: "contour" or "neuron"
* `creator`: username of the creator
* `downsample`: the downsample factor the vertices are defined on
* `edits`: the list of edits made on this contour
* `id`: a random uuid for this contour
* `label_position`: the position of the structure name text item relative to the whole image
* `name`: unsided name of this structure
* `orientation`: sagittal, coronal or horizontal
* `parent_structure`: currently not used
* `section`: the section number
* `side`: L or R
* `side_manually_assigned`: True if the side is confirmed by human; False if the side is automatically inferred.
* `time_created`: the time that the contour is created
* `type`: "intersected" if this contour is the result of interpolation or "confirmed" if confirmed by human
* `vertices`: vertices of a polygon. (n,2)-ndarray. wrt "prep2" crop, in unit of pixel at full resolution (~0.45 microns).
* `filename`: the file name of the section.
